probably transit authority people, suggested
that they assumed that this transit line, if you
will, if it goes in the West Park corridor, really
wouldn't disrupt much of anything else. And my
problem was that... Did you try to convince them of
this? Urge them? It seems to me that if you're
putting in... Now, it runs... It's right here.
From West University out to Alif? Well, they
leave. It runs back over here somewhere. But
anyway, it runs out that way. It picks up Greenway
and everything else. But what I... They just... We
had a lot of arguments about what the effects would
be. And they're only looking at transportation
issues. And I say, hold on. We have certain things
we're going to be blamed for. Traffic congestion,
inefficient sewer, inefficient water, solid
waste. How are we going to deal with the
development that occurs due to your putting in
virtually in another mode another freeway? And
where you've got those transit stations, you're
going to have some activity because property
value in there is going to go sky high, and you're
going to have some intensive development. And...
I think that they're going to be looking at that,
but I'm not sure. And I'm a little concerned about
that because we'll get blamed for it. You can't get
to the goddamn station because there's not enough
street. Well, you know. Rick, there are two
excellent models that exist in the world for this
sort of opportunity.
One is in Toronto, and the other is in Stockholm.
The mass transit planning in both cases has been
done hand in hand with land use planning. And the
land use planning
proceeds in total sync with the mass transit
planning, the underground, the subway systems,
or the tunnel bond out of Stockholm and so forth.
And they would not think of planning high density
unless they knew they had a transit stop there. I
understand that Toronto in the last 20 years has
made a fantastic turnaround from being a nowhere
city of North America to possibly the showcase of
how to do it today. So maybe your people ought to
make a couple field trips. Yeah. Yeah, I went to
Germany. I don't know. That was a trip I missed. But
I'm looking at it now. The other point that we did
discuss briefly that I'd like to talk about is the
absence, it seems, in planning of a generalist
planner. And you find that everyone is diving off
into a specialty, be it health systems or
transportation or whatever. And it seems like the
role of the generalist planner, which
at least used to be what planners were, that they
knew a process and therefore could apply it to
anything. I think that we've been outrun by our
legal people. I find that most planning decisions
and policy decisions that are made in a number of
cities, including this one, that are planning
decisions, are being made by lawyers. And... I'm
not sure that that's something that was in the long
term
good for cities. And you can adjudicate anything.
But there are other issues involved that a more
general type planning person could probably see a
little more of. That's why I work with the lawyer
that I work with, and he and I And I deal policy. He
deals legal. But it's a shame. I have not met very
many. I'm a transportation planner. I'm a health
planner. I've never said shit. Well, you remember
in comprehensive planning, you talked about the
concept of the hyphenated planner. Yes. You'd
have the transportation hyphen planner, the
health hyphen planner, the whatever hyphen
planner. But who are the planner planners? That's
the question you're asking. Where have they gone?
Are we training any today in the universities?
What is your perception of the recent grads from
the Texas planning schools? Well, most of them are
specialists, and that's fine. I've not been very
impressed with them. I have interviewed a number
of people, They're very intense about what
they're doing, but they're very myopic about what
they're doing. It reminds me of engineers a little
bit.
You know, you give somebody a situation and then
they'll say, well, what they need is this service.
They may not need that service, but that's what
they were taught to do. A health plan. Well, they
need dental care. Low-income people need dental
care. Low-income people need money. They don't
need dental care. Fuck the dental care. Go get the
money as it is. That's the kind of thing. I think
people don't cut through the bullshit. I think
we've become isolated unto ourselves with our own
little vocabulary at a time when you've got to
explain to people that a council person who may be a
developer or maybe something doesn't understand
the kinds of things that the planners talk about.
And I think you pick up vocabularies. I speak HUD, a
little EPA, and a little EDA. But they're very
different dialects. And I think we need to get the
whole planning profession in general needs to get
down a little bit. And be political. And know what
you're doing. Be able to explain. And know in your
head and in your heart, you know, what you're
doing. And be able to explain these things to
people. Don't sit back and make recommendations
because somebody said so. You know, but I would
much rather see a more general
plan or come out of some of these things. Because I
feel all of us were. I don't think anybody had any
special drinking beer, you know. But I think most
of the people that I know are doing quite well. And
we might get into a specialty. We might not. There
have been three or four of us that have gotten
straight into management positions. And nobody
ever thought about being a city manager. Far be it
for me to think about being an executive assistant
to the mayor of Houston. Or like, found out, didn't
know. City manager. Right. Crabtree's assistant
city manager.
There are several others, which I can't think of
right now. Well, Dana Bennett, sure. Right, Dana
Bennett. You know, but you're not going to have a
unimodal transportation planner going anywhere
except on the staff of that operation. And they're
just other things to be considered. And I think a
good comprehensive, not comprehensive, I never
use that word, a general planning base where you
learn the planning process and then go on if you
want an area of specialization seems to me to be the
route to go. Otherwise, you know, other than slugs
on somebody's staff, the goddamn lawyers are
going to run it. You're saying it's dangerous to
tie an educational program into current federal
mandated funded projects. Absolutely. Because,
I mean, look, the transportation bills weren't
funded. You know, all of a sudden, 701 went away.
And then 208. 208 screwed up. So everybody's
gearing to these federal programs rather than
taking an overall view. Because you can learn the
vocabulary. I mean, it doesn't take you very long.
Well, this all gets back to the role of higher
education in the professions.
Rick, thanks very much for your time and your
careful consideration to these questions
involving the planning process as we have come to
know it in Houston. And I want to thank you for the
Texas chapter of the American Planning
Association and for the Texas A&M University
Department of Regional Planning. And we look
forward to seeing you visit us in the near future.
Thank you.